To: J3
From: Balint Aradi
Subject: Protected attribute for derived type components
Date: 2019-October-21

Proposal for Fortran Standard: 202y (NOT 202x)


1. Introduction

The proposal is to allow specify the protected attribute for components in
derived types. Example:


    type :: prot_t
      integer, allocatable, protected :: array(:)
    end type prot_t


2. Motivation

Data hiding using derived types with private components allows programmer to
provide robust types, where internals can only be changed in controlled
fashion. The usual implementation is to provide setter and getter routines for
writing and reading components. Both operations involve copying the passed data,
which can be inefficient when storing large arrays in the derived type
instance. While in the setter routine the copying serves robustness by
"disentangling" the data stored in the derived type from the original data, the
getter routine and the connected copy operation might be superfluous, when the
consumer only wants to read but not modify the data stored in the derived type
intance.

By allowing for a direct read-only access, one could enhance efficiency in those
cases without sacrificing the consistency of the encapsulated data. Direct
access is possible with current Fortran already, but only if the respective
derived type component is public. This would jeopardize data consistency,
though, as a consumer could change the respective component arbitrarily, without
using the provided setter routine.

This proposal suggests to allow the "protected" attribute already used for
module variables being used for derived type components as well. It would also
remedy the asymmetry between the attributes "private"/"public" and the attribute
"protected", as the former two can be applied to both, module variables and
derived type components, while the latter only for module variables so far.


3. Use Cases

Derived types storing large amount of data could enable read-only access to
components without the necessity of a getter routine and the connected copy
operation:

  module data_m
    implicit none

    type :: prot_t
      ! Large array component
      integer, allocatable, protected :: array(:)
    contains
      procedure :: set
    end type prot_t

  contains

    subroutine set(this, array)
      type(prot_t), intent(out) :: this

      this%array = array

    end subroutine set

  end module data_m



  program use_data
    use data_m
    implicit none

    type(prot_t) :: storage
    integer, allocatable :: large_array(:)

    ! Filling up and allocating the large array
    ! ...

    ! Storing the large array in the derived type instance
    call storage%set(large_array)

    ! Accessing large array stored in the derived type directly
    ! No getter routine and no copy necessary
    ! Dummy argument of the called routine must be intent(in)
    call some_routine_processing_but_not_changing_the_array(storage%array)

    ! Inconsistent change, consumer is supposed to call set() to change
    ! encapsulated data.
    ! Uncommenting the next line should trigger a compiler error.
    !storage%array(1) = -1

  end program use_data
